OpenSubtitles recommends using Nord VPN
"Katharine Teresa Gun,
"you are charged
with an offence
"contrary to Section 1,
Subsection 1
"of the Official Secrets Act
of 1989
"and that you did knowingly
and intentionally
"disclose top secret
intelligence information
"contrary to the said act."
How do you plead?
Guilty or not guilty?
- What?
- The neighbors will hear.
Let's move over.
- Better?
- Better.
And what about the situation
of persuading the people?
Because it's very,
to put it mildly
uncomfortable to go to war
with 73% against.
If people are being asked today
do you support a war,
my answer to that
is we're not at war today.
I think especially,
obviously, if the UN pass
the second resolution,
as I believe they will
if the inspectors carry on
saying he's not cooperating,
I think public opinion
is in a different place.
When your correspondent
was saying
the war is inevitable,
war is not inevitable.
It depends on Saddam.
If he cooperates
with the inspectors,
if he says
how much material he's got,
if he cooperates fully
with them,
then the issue's over.
But he's not doing that
at the moment.
Bloody liar.
They're all bloody liars.
You know, actually,
I don't think they are.
I don't think the weapons
inspectors are lying.
This and international terrorism
are the two
big security threats.
- Want coffee?
- No, thanks.
We were told,
we were given to understand
that what these inspectors
were gonna come up with was
evidence of weapons
of mass destruction,
chemical,
biological and nuclear.
What we know is that
he has this material.
Oh, my God, we don't know that.
We don't know that.
I mean, he just keeps
repeating the lie.
You sure it's a lie?
Saddam's a psychopath.
Yeah, well, just because
you're the Prime Minister,
it doesn't mean you get
to make up your own facts.
Do you think you have
the goods on him now?
I've got no doubt at all that
he's developing these weapons
and that he poses a threat.
- Be at the cafe by 4:00.
- I can fetch you at 5:00.
No, no, no. I was gonna
get the bus. I love you.
Love you.
Yes.
You know he has a place
in Devon.
He wants to take me surfing
with his dog.
- Is that a bad thing?
- No, it's a great dog.
Okay.
When was the last time
you got away?
Don't know,
three or four weeks ago.
We went hiking in Yorkshire.
Shall we all go
hiking together?
Yeah, that would be lovely.
With the dog?
Thank you.
I'm starving.
I've been here since 5:00,
listening
to a Russian embassy staffer
trying to bribe
a North Korean defector
who's been downloading
some kinky shit.
- Very arousing few hours.
- You're disgusting.
It's for the Queen and country.
MI6 thought the Korean
was one of ours.
I just proved he's not.
GCHQ, 1. MI6, 0.
Katharine.
I need your Beijing report
for the Foreign Office.
They start trade talks
next week.
Yeah, on it.
Andy.
Did you get this NSA e-mail?
Are the Yanks really asking us
to dig up personal shit
on UN Security Council
delegates?
"They want
the whole gamut of info
"that could give
US policy makers an edge
"in obtaining results
favorable to US goals."
Christ, they wanna fix the vote.
"This effort will probably peak
in the middle of next week
"following the Secretary
of State's presentation
"to the UN Security Council."
Powell's gonna argue for war.
And they're gonna blackmail
the smaller nations
to make sure they get it. Fuck.
Excuse me. Question.
Yeah.
This NSA memo,
our people approved it?
Yes, that's why
it's been forwarded.
The Americans want us
to help them get a UN resolution for war?
By next week?
It's a joint UK/USA operation.
UKUSA. Right. Got it.
Hey, ours not to reason why.
Everything good today,
Mrs. Archer?
Yes, thank you.
Very good. Very, very good.
I'll see you again tomorrow,
yes?
Yes.
Thank you, dear.
- Hey.
You okay?
Yeah, it's been a long day.
I need ten minutes.
Want something to eat?
No.
You working this weekend?
Could we go somewhere,
get out of town?
Sorry, janum,
I'll get next weekend for sure.
A question
for the President if I may.
What is the status, in your
view, of any second resolution?
Is it something
that you think is worth
spending time and energy
trying to assemble?
Just let me reiterate
what I just said.
This is a matter of weeks,
not months.
Any attempt to drag
the process on for months
will be resisted
by the United States.
- Can we watch something else?
- No, no, this is important.
Secretary Powell
will make a strong case
about the danger
of a armed Saddam Hussein
and he will also talk
about Al-Qaeda links.
Come on, there are
no credible links
between Saddam and Al-Qaeda.
...really do portend
a danger...
- I'll turn it off.
- No, no, no, no, no.
Please,
I need to watch this.
I need to know
what they're saying.
I mean, yes.
Yes, Saddam is a dictator,
but he is not a religious nut.
I mean, why would he risk
arming Al-Qaeda
and have them turn against him?
It doesn't make any sense!
Fine, but yelling at the TV
isn't going to make any difference.
They can't bloody hear you.
- Where you going?
- To read a book.
You see, my vision
shifted dramatically
after September 11.
I realized
the world has changed.
My most important obligation
is to protect
the American people
from further harm.
And I will do that.
Thank you all very much.
- Love you.
Don't forget to check in
at the station.
What are you gonna do?
I don't know. Read a book.
I'll be back by 7:00 latest.
- Mr. Gun. Signing in?
- Yes, thank you.
When will you know
if you can stay?
They don't say.
Could be weeks.
Could be months.
You never know with immigration,
do you?
- I know.
- Thank you.
Hi, Jasmine, it's Kath.
Are you around today?
I'd love to come and see you.
- Kath.
- Hi.
Come here.
Hello.
Targeting who?
The UN Security Council.
Particularly
the non-permanent members
who could swing the vote
in favor of war.
Jesus.
Maybe it's time to quit.
You know,
they say if you stay at GCHQ
for more than five years,
you never leave.
I've still got two to go then.
So you've still got
a conscience.
Are you still organizing
against the war?
Does GCHQ have a problem
with that?
- What? No.
- Give me your phone.
I've already
taken the battery out.
- I called you from a payphone.
- Sorry.
Go on.
I just thought...
...if I could get you
a copy of the memo,
then maybe you could get
somebody to look it over.
I don't know, a journalist,
someone
in the anti-war movement.
Look, if the press think
it's nothing, fine.
At least my conscience is clear.
Your conscience?
Kat, you're asking me
to collude in a breach
of the Official Secrets Act.
Some call that treason.
I am not trying to overthrow
my government.
I just think
if someone in the press saw it,
they might ask more questions
about what the Americans
are asking
this country to do.
Hey, Kat, they're sending me
and Dan to London
to learn Farsi.
Wow, Farsi. Congrats.
- How many languages now?
- Eight.
She's a freakin' super spy.
Andy,
where's my Pyongyang report?
- One more hour.
- Yeah, just get it done.
- When do you leave?
- Two weeks.
You'll have to come visit me.
Is that
the Foreign Office report?
- It's a rough draft.
- Well, finish it.
Defense section
needs extra hands.
I said I'd send you over there
this afternoon.
Okay, will do.
What we're giving you
our facts and conclusions
based on solid intelligence.
The issue before us
is not how much time
we are willing to give
the inspectors,
but how much longer
are we willing to put up
with Iraq's non-compliance
before we as a council,
we as United Nations say enough.
Enough.
We have first-hand descriptions
of biological weapons factories
on wheels and on rails.
The trucks and train cars
are easily moved
and are designed to evade
detection by inspectors.
Although Iraq's
mobile production program
began in mid-1990s,
UN inspectors at the time
only had vague hints
of such programs.
Confirmation came later
in the year 2000.
The source was an eyewitness.
An Iraqi chemical engineer
who supervised
one of these facilities.
Hi.
I'm gonna watch some football.
Do you mind?
No. Go for it.
From the north, the south,
the east and the west,
from the left, the right
from the radical
to the uncommitted
they came.
Well, we can argue forever
about the validity of opinion polls,
but what surely matters today
is that this proposed war
by Britain
is historically unpopular
and the mother of all
focus groups has descended.
Hey, Martin. We're now doing
some real reporting.
It's huge.
Police are saying over 500,000.
Organizers are saying
over two million.
So it will be a million then?
Well, it's everywhere.
Every country.
Biggest demonstration
in human history.
Roger, I filed this story
seven times.
And seven times I have told you
I'm not going to print it.
Ed, this paper supports the war.
Our sources support
the war, Kamal.
All I'm asking is that
mine be given equal time.
- Fair enough.
- Thank you.
Well, what do they say, Ed?
That intelligence
is being manipulated
to support an invasion
that Bush Junior's been pushing for
ever since Saddam tried to kill
his daddy in '93.
Oh, come on,
your source is retired.
My source is ex-CIA!
He talks to agents every day
and he's talking to me
on the record!
Named source! Christ!
If you're gonna encourage
a country to go to war,
perhaps you should spend
some time on the front lines yourself!
- That is a cheap shot, Ed.
- Is it?
We're the press, for God's sake,
not a fucking PR agency
for Tony Blair.
- That's enough!
- All right!
You, go back to the States.
I want you to find me something
from a source
who hasn't already retired
and then maybe I'll rethink it.
You're doing a great job of it.
We just need some more.
Yes, Peter.
Fuck you very much.
And fewer words!
If I ask for 500,
don't send me 3,000!
This paper needs to take
its finger out of its arse
and stop taking
Tony Blair's press releases
at face fucking value!
- Hear, hear.
- Abso-fucking-lutely.
- Christ!
- You're too bloody right.
Brighty, where's my piece
comparing Saddam to Milošević?
I need 400 words.
Yeah. It's not really
a 400-word topic, Rog.
Yeah, it is. We have a right
to intervene in the Balkans.
We should do the same in Iraq.
Iraq's a little
more complicated.
- You've got Suni and Shia...
- Oh, fuck Sonny and Cher!
What is this?
"I got you babe?"
Just give me 400 words
the average reader will understand.
Milošević bad. Saddam bad.
Just write a fucking story.
Stop overthinking it.
All right.
That was helpful.
Just write the piece
as you see it, Martin,
and we'll cut it down later
if we need to, all right?
Okay. Thank you, Peter.
Sonny and Cher.
Martin Bright.
I've got something
you need to see.
It's big, Martin, really big.
Yvonne?
Martin. So good to see you.
In an underground car park?
It's a little Deep Throat,
don't you think?
- There's no signal down here.
- Right.
Wait till you see this.
- Who gave you this?
- Can't say.
There's no info
saying who sent it.
This could have been
written by anyone.
- That's who wrote it.
- Well.
Frank Koza.
- Who the fuck is Frank Koza?
- NSA.
And this I know
because the letters NSA
have been written on the back
with a leaky ballpoint.
My source says
the header wasn't printed
to protect the recipients
at GCHQ.
When did you get it?
- Two weeks ago.
- Two weeks?
I gave it to The Mirror first.
Sorry.
Jesus. Why didn't they run it?
- They thought it was fake.
- No shit.
- Is your source NSA?
- No. A friend of the recipient.
- A good friend.
- A friend of a friend?
A good friend
of a trusted friend.
I'm sure it's real.
Then why don't you
write the story?
Oh, come on, Martin.
I'm anti-war.
You're with The Observer.
Just check it out.
NSA Press Office.
How may I assist you?
Yes, hi, hello there.
This is Martin Bright
from The Observer in London.
I'd like to arrange
an interview
with Mr. Frank Koza.
May I speak to his office,
please?
- I'm sorry, Mr. Bright?
- Martin Bright, yes.
Yes. Who did you wanna get?
Frank Koza, "Chief of Staff,
Regional Targets."
Mr. Bright, I'm afraid
we can't confirm
the names of people
who work here.
Could you give me
a little more detail
about the story
you're working on?
Well, no. That's something
I need to talk to Mr. Koza
about directly, I'm afraid.
Well, then I'm afraid
I'm not sure I can help you.
When you have a little
more detail
please feel free to call back.
Yeah, well...
Hello?
- You rang the NSA Press Office?
- Yeah.
They have a press office.
I thought that was a good place
to start.
But you didn't tell them
anything?
No, Peter.
I just asked for Frank Koza.
Because if this is real,
you could go to jail
just for having it
in your possession.
I'm not letting this go.
It's too good a story.
I agree,
but if you get it wrong
it will sink you,
it will sink the paper.
I'd like to get
a credible intelligence expert
to offer a view
on the language.
- Yeah.
- And I thought you could run it by
your MI6 contact?
- I don't have a MI6 contact.
- Sorry.
I meant your tennis club friend.
Sure.
I'll take it
to Admiral Wilkinson.
Be careful. Before we risk
a D-notice against publication
I'd actually like confirmation
that Frank Koza exists.
Do you think it's authentic?
Well, certainly the words he used,
"TOPI," for example,
few outside
of the security apparatus
would know what that means.
What does it mean?
Target of primary interest.
And this term,
"QRC surge effort,"
that's NSA military speak
for significant intensification
of surveillance operations.
And this, where they ask
for "valuable information
"from accesses
in your product lines..."
...product lines
are intelligence sources.
So it's been written by someone
who's familiar with security speak
but that doesn't mean
it's definitely NSA.
True, but there are
no obvious amateur mistakes.
- Have you heard of Frank Koza?
- No.
Paul, if we, if we wanted
to confirm that he exists...
Oh, sorry.
I couldn't help you do that.
Yeah, but if we wanted
to confirm that he...
Well, my own sources
wouldn't ever trust me again.
Understood.
- What?
- Ed, Martin Bright.
Martin, Christ,
I just got back to DC.
Sorry, Peter and I
have something urgent
that we'd like to run by you.
Are you on speaker?
We are now. Hey...
Peter, you need to tell Roger
to publish what I'm filing.
This paper can't be seen
to be supporting a war
that we should be doing
everything in our power
to expose as a con.
A neocon.
A giant fucking con!
Ed, that's why we're phoning.
We need your help.
We have something
that might corroborate
these things, you could say.
Hey. Sorry.
- Do you wanna get lunch?
- What?
Lunch. Eat. Now. Yes.
Oh, no, I'm fine, thanks.
- Are you all right?
- Yeah. Yeah. I'm good.
It...
This new BBC poll, it says that
less than one in ten people
think it's right to attack Iraq
without a UN resolution.
Which is why that memo was sent.
They need to twist arms.
I don't think
it will make any difference.
Most of the world
is against them.
You wanna eat, eat.
National Security Agency.
How may I direct your call?
Hello, I'm returning
Frank Koza's call.
My secretary said it was urgent.
I'm sorry.
Who are you trying to reach?
Frank Koza. Mr. Frank Koza.
Sir, I'm sorry,
there's no one
by that name
in the directory, sir.
Oh, well, then that's odd.
He called me.
I'm sorry, but I'll need
an extension number.
Do you have
an extension number?
Nah.
Is there anything else
I can do for you?
No. No.
Thank you. Thank you.
You have a nice day,
sir.
You too.
Fuck off.
So I read the weapons inspector's report.
Congratulations.
That's more
than most MP's ever done.
- Well, shit, that's depressing.
- It is.
Look, there are a few
pre-98 chemical weapons
we have yet to be accounted for
but inspectors said
they found absolutely
no evidence
of an active chemical
or biological program.
Correct.
And yet Colin Powell presented
clear evidence of mobile labs.
His evidence may be based
on poor human intel
from an Iraqi dissident.
Really?
The dissident isn't our product
and should not be seen
as our product.
Whose product is he then?
Look, Peter, I didn't say this,
but there is concern
in certain quarters
that intelligence
may be being manipulated
to take this country to war.
So why don't you tell
your journalists
to stop being so bloody loyal
to Downing Street
and start doing their job?
Okay.
Okay, what if I had evidence
that the NSA
requested GCHQ to help monitor
private communications
of the UN Security Council
delegates?
- To what end?
- Bluntly?
To blackmail them
into voting for war.
I'm not with GCHQ.
You're MI6,
you're on the same team.
How did you hear about this?
A UN resolution for war
would cover everyone's arse,
wouldn't it?
No more asking your team
to sex up evidence of WMDs
or the back-dodgy claims that
Britain was about to be attacked
by Iraq within 45 minutes.
And no chance of anyone
being charged with a war crime
if it all goes tits up.
What are you asking me, Peter?
I'm asking if you can confirm
whether the NSA instructed GCHQ
to assist in spying
on Security Council delegates?
You know I can't answer that.
To do so would put me in breach
of the Official Secrets Act.
To deny it would not.
Well, I can neither confirm
nor deny.
Okay.
Let's play.
- Change ends, idiot.
- Yes.
Your serve.
So the head of the CIA
tells Bush it's a slam dunk
that Saddam has weapons
of mass destruction.
- A slam dunk.
- Yes.
- And that's not true?
- No.
Meaning Saddam definitely
does not have weapons
of mass destruction
or he may not.
Meaning the intelligence
is sketchy at best
and manufactured at worst.
And Tenet knows that?
I've no doubt he knows that.
I was with the agency 24 years.
I can tell you, folks over there
are really angry about this.
Why?
Because the majority
of the analysts do not believe
it's a slam dunk,
but no one wants to hear that.
Not even the press.
- Sorry, Mel.
- I'm sorry.
I'm just mad as hell.
Listen, I wanted to talk
to you today
because I think I might
finally be onto something that...
...that really support what
you've been saying for months.
I need to talk to a man
called Frank Koza.
He's NSA.
Head of Regional Targets.
You know him?
I'm sorry, Ed.
I can't give out
that kind of information.
- What are you doing here?
- I'm sorry.
- I didn't wanna call.
- How long have you been here?
We're not supposed
to be meeting.
I know, I've just...
I've been following the news
and I haven't seen
or heard anything
for three weeks.
Okay, well,
I've given it to my contact
and apparently,
she's having a very hard time
getting the papers
to believe that it's not a fake.
Well, maybe that's okay.
You know, I...
Look, I mean,
all of the polls said
everyone's against the war,
anyway
and I,
and I've just been thinking...
Look, I think
that I acted too rashly
on impulse.
I didn't think...
Jesus, Katharine, is it a fake?
Of course it's not a fake.
It's real.
Well, then just go home!
Okay, don't talk about this
to anyone, ever!
Just...
- Sorry.
- It's out of our hands now.
Sorry.
The truth is, the whole document
could be a fake.
But we're satisfied
the language used is real.
- It's fascinating.
- Yeah.
Is this document
actually in your possession?
Well, if it were, I'd be
in breach of the Official Secrets Act
wouldn't I?
So based on what might be
in this document...
- That you don't have.
- That I don't yet have.
But that you want to print
in your paper.
If you don't issue
a D-notice against publication.
Well, which I will
most certainly do
if I think the publication
might in any way
endanger the lives
of British people
or British forces.
- Understood.
- Good.
Go on.
Would you say
it were likely real
or a forgery?
What do you think?
I think it could be a fake
put out
by the anti-war movement...
...or by a foreign agency
to embarrass the US.
- Which agency?
- The Russians.
I mean,
the French oppose the war, too,
but I don't think
they'd do this.
I think you might be
overthinking it as usual, Martin.
- Meaning?
- You tell me.
Well, meaning it could be
exactly what it says it is.
You know, Martin,
I believe that all information
collected in the name
of the public should be made public.
The only question is, when.
But in this case, I don't have
the luxury of time, Admiral.
Powell just made
a very strong case for war.
Yes, I see.
I have also always believed
that censorship when called for
should be based
on security issues alone...
...not on whether a news report
might embarrass a government.
Thank you, Admiral.
Ed, it's Edie
from the London office.
I got a weird message for you
from someone
who wouldn't give his name.
He said you should call
extension 6727.
Makes no sense to me,
but maybe to you.
6727. Good luck.
- 6727.
- Bye-bye.
6727. 6727. 6727.
6727.
NSA.
How may I direct your call?
Hello.
Extension 6727, please.
6727?
6727, yes.
One moment.
Frank Koza's office.
Hello, may I speak
to Mr. Frank Koza, please?
Who shall I say is calling?
I can't say.
Just put me through.
Yes, sir.
Hello?
Mr. Koza? Mr. Frank Koza?
Yes. Who's calling?
Mr. Koza,
my name is Ed Vulliamy.
I work for The Observer
newspaper in London.
I wanted to ask you about a memo
you sent to GCHQ.
Mr. Koza?
- Do you think this is real?
- Yes, they put me through.
- To Frank Koza?
- Yes.
And you spoke to him directly,
right, Ed?
Well, we didn't exactly
have a conversation.
Did you speak to him or not?
Yes or no, Ed? Jesus.
Yes, but he cut me off
when I said I worked
for The Observer.
But you're sure that he exists,
right, Ed?
Hell yes, I'm sure!
I said, "Mr. Koza?"
He said, "Yes, who's calling?"
All right. Thank you, Ed.
Try not to fuck this one up,
Roger.
- Fuck off.
- You're welcome, anytime.
- Hitler Diaries.
- What?
I'm just saying it smells of a forgery
like the Hitler Diaries
and, of course, publishing those
cost people their jobs.
Which is precisely
why we're doing
rigorous checking on this,
Kamal.
- Who brought you this?
- Friend.
- Someone from GCHQ?
- No.
Then who?
- Yvonne Ridley.
- Yvonne fucking Ridley!
The woman who fell off a donkey
in Afghanistan
at some Taliban checkpoint!
Her arse over a tit
with a camera up her burka
and then she converted to Islam
after she was released
by her kidnapper.
None of which means
she's not right!
She's anti-war!
She probably typed
the fucking thing herself.
Martin, you realize
the legal risks we'll be taking?
The last time
we published anything like this
you and Roger
almost went to prison.
Jan, the last time
our source claimed
MI6 had funded an attempted
assassination on Gaddafi.
This document
doesn't accuse anyone
of doing anything
remotely like that.
No, it merely suggests
that the US government,
with the help of Great Britain,
might try to twist arms
and threaten UN delegates
into voting for a war in Iraq.
It's a hell of a story.
Look, we know Koza exists.
Beaver says
the language used is authentic.
And Wilkinson says
that while publication
may embarrass both governments,
he doesn't believe
that it poses a security risk
to the British people
or the armed forces.
Ironically,
publication may actually
prevent a war and save lives.
- Well.
- MI6?
Would not confirm
but did not deny.
Jan, where are we legally?
Wilkinson may not issue
a D-Notice
but that doesn't stop
Special Branch from coming after us.
- Thank you.
- Legally, we have a top secret document
in our possession.
Look, Rog, don't forget
we're getting
detailed information
directly from Blair's office.
- Fuck off.
- Well, he's right.
Printing this kind of story
would kill that relationship.
Since when did this paper
prioritize political access
over its own
investigative reporting?
- Yes.
- We have taken a position on this, guys!
We support the war.
Yes. We do.
Fuck.
But Peter's right.
This is a fucking good story.
Thank you, Roger.
Here we go.
Wait, I'll come with you.
I'm just going to go
get some milk.
Go back to bed.
I'll bring you a coffee.
Okay.
- Hi.
- Morning.
Hey.
What's the matter, janum?
What's going on?
- Bravo, Martin.
- There he is.
Well done.
- Here he is!
- Nice one, Martin.
Brighty, congratulations.
Bloody brilliant.
- Thank you.
- What have you got for me next?
Every major European paper
is citing us
and we've had calls
in from CNN, NBC, and Fox.
They all want to interview you
for their morning shows
when they wake up in the US.
Any response
from Downing Street?
We got a call in,
but they're scrambling.
Martin, line 2.
Martin Bright.
Thank you. Thank you.
No.
No, the person who leaked it
hasn't been identified.
Why'd you do it?
I just thought
that they'd investigate.
I never expected them
to print the whole memo.
Why didn't you tell me?
Sorry, I didn't,
I didn't, I...
I thought that you would try
and talk me out of it
and I didn't want you to.
- My God, janum.
- I'm so sorry.
They don't mention your name?
- I haven't told anyone.
- Good. That's good.
That's very kind.
All right, thank you.
Why don't you get in touch
with your friend Tony, Kamal?
- Ask him if he has an opinion.
- That's not funny, Rog.
- Martin?
- Yes?
NBC just canceled
your interview.
What?
NBC no longer wished
to interview Martin.
Did they say why?
They just said sorry,
but they didn't think
they could fit you in anymore.
Really?
Brighty, reporter from Santiago.
Thank you. Martin Bright.
No.
At this stage, we have no idea
what information
was gathered from Chile
or any of the other countries.
- Peter.
- Yeah?
Fox says
that they have to cancel.
What? Why?
Yeah,
Mexico is furious too.
Okay. Thank you.
- Martin?
- Yes?
I've got a producer from CNN.
Martin Bright.
I see.
No. No, no. No, no.
That's all right.
May I ask why?
Yes, I stand by it.
Of course I stand by it.
The Drudge Report?
Yeah.
All right, okay.
What the fuck is going on?
It's fake.
We've printed
a fake fucking memo
from Yvonne fucking Ridley!
You fucking idiot.
There. You see it?
Because the Americans did.
Favourable. F-A-V-O-U-R.
Some English cunt has tried
to fake an American NSA memo
and you fucking schmucks
fell for it.
Wait.
Martin, where's the original?
Where's the original document?
Jesus.
- American spelling.
- What?
The original
has American spelling.
And this is what I filed, see?
Favorable. O-R.
Just like the original.
Not O-U-R.
And recognize with a Z,
not an S.
Who changed what I wrote?
Who...
Who changed
what I fucking wrote?
Come on, speak up!
Who did this?
Nicole, what did you do?
I...
I ran it through spell check.
- Spell check?
- Jesus.
That's what I always do.
I'm so sorry.
Do not cry, Nicole.
Do not fucking cry.
Okay, well, we know
that it's not fake.
We go online, we explain what happened,
we call all of the networks.
Stop it, Martin.
Fuck, Rog,
it was an honest mistake.
Don't be so naive.
You're an American editor.
What story do you put out now?
That The Observer
is doubling down on a fake memo?
Or that the staff
of this newspaper
are really so colossally stupid!
It's all right.
Would you like a cup of tea?
Someone in this building
has betrayed their government
and their country.
Now I'm sure it wasn't anyone
in this division,
but starting today,
Internal Security
will be conducting interviews
with each and every one of you.
If you know anything
or suspect anyone,
it is your sworn duty
to speak up.
If you do not
and you are found to have
withheld information
of any kind,
you will be charged
with a breach
of the Official Secrets Act.
You should see the file
that tosser's got on me.
- What did he ask you?
- Katharine!
Come in, Katharine.
- Katharine Gun?
- Yes?
I'm John from Internal Security.
Please.
Mandarin translator.
GCHQ for two years.
- Yes.
- And before that?
I taught English
to Japanese students.
- Hiroshima, right?
- Yes.
Interesting.
Did you visit the memorial?
The peace memorial?
To the people
killed by the atomic bomb?
Yes, actually, I did.
It's...
It's something
you really have to see.
It's very moving.
Compels one to think
about the consequences of war,
doesn't it?
- Yes, I suppose it does.
- Are you anti-war, Katharine?
No.
I think
sometimes war is necessary.
I see you lived in Taiwan
as a child?
- Yes.
- How long did you live there?
We moved over
when I was three.
I came back
to do my A-levels.
So for most
of your childhood then?
Yes.
You had a religious upbringing?
No, not particularly.
But were you sent away
to a Christian missionary school
in Taiwan?
Yes.
Gave you a clear sense
of right and wrong, did it,
being in a mission school?
I think
my parents gave me that.
Did you leak the Koza e-mail?
- No.
- No?
No.
- But you read it?
- Yes.
I mean, it was sent to me,
so I read it.
What were your immediate
thoughts after you read it?
Nothing much.
It didn't really bother me.
- It didn't?
- No.
Who do you think
might have leaked it?
- I have no idea.
- No?
- No.
No.
Thank you, Mrs. Gun.
That's all for now.
Eat a little.
Please.
They're bringing everyone in.
One by one.
You haven't said anything?
Okay. Just eat a little.
Everything will be all right.
Eat.
Hi, Fiona, it's Katharine.
I'm so sorry
but I don't think I'm gonna
be able to come in today.
Yeah, I think
I've caught a tummy bug.
Yeah.
Thank you.
Thank you so much.
What'd she say?
She said
I should get some rest.
Good.
- She was nice.
- That's good.
Try and sleep.
Sorry, I have to go.
...ask you about a report
in The Observer newspaper
in London, a memo
reported to be from a man
who actually works at the NSA
in which he describes
a "surge in surveillance
"of UN Security Council
members."
What's your response?
Terry, as a matter
of long-standing policy
the administration
never comments on anything
involving any people
involved in intelligence.
- No, of course, you don't.
- What the fuck?
If you're
a Cameroonian diplomat
or a French diplomat
at the United Nations
then you're gonna have
to operate on the assumption
that the United States
is bugging you.
No, it's a blanket matter
of policy
that we do not answer questions
of that nature...
- Hi.
...I'm not indicating to you
whether it's true or not true.
Have you eaten?
...of policy that predates
this administration.
I brought soup. A bean salad.
I'm gonna say it was me.
The Americans are refusing
to admit that the memo was real.
- I have to tell the truth.
- No.
If I don't, then they'll get away
with saying it was a fake.
Janum, you did what you could.
Now leave it alone, please!
What am I supposed to do?
Am I supposed to keep lying
forever?
If you say nothing,
they can never prove anything.
They are questioning
everyone at work.
They're interrogating
my friends.
They're asking people
to name names.
- That will be over soon.
- And then what?
There will be a question mark
in hundreds of people's files
because of me.
They will put you in jail!
I have to prove it was real.
Everyone at work knows that
what the NSA asked us to do
was illegal.
- Nobody cares!
- Well, I care!
If I don't say it was me,
then we'll go to war
based on blackmail
and lies.
And I can't live
with that. I won't.
Janum, please listen to me.
I work at a cafe.
I took the job
because I needed a job.
But it's just a job.
You did the same thing,
remember?
When you saw the advert,
you said you didn't even know
what the job really was.
It's just a job.
And you can get another job.
You just need to keep your head
down for a few more weeks
until things calm down.
Then you resign,
you can get another job.
Hey.
On a diet?
- What?
- No cinnamon bun?
Who's in there now?
Nuri. Second time.
Had him take a lie detector test
yesterday.
Mi-Yung!
I did it.
It was me.
Katharine.
Leave us, please.
Handbag.
Rings.
Necklace.
Watch. Belt.
I don't have a belt.
Take her through cell 7.
I've found the passports
and a couple of foreign books.
Who are you?
Where's my wife?
I want to see her.
Where is she?
They can't keep me long.
They haven't charged me yet.
No contact, please.
- Where are they holding you?
- Downstairs.
I'm okay.
I promise I'm okay.
I brought this.
It will get cold tonight.
Thank you.
Lights out.
- Katharine Gun?
- Yes.
We're from Scotland Yard.
Do you have a lawyer?
No.
There's a duty solicitor on call.
She'll sit in with you.
Your supervisor speaks highly
of your integrity.
She says this breach
was a foolish one-off.
Was it?
Do you mean if I leaked anything else? No.
- Do you intend to?
- No.
I've always been very proud
to work at GCHQ.
Until now.
Yes. Until now.
What were you employed to do?
Well, I can't be specific.
Be general then.
I translated signals intelligence
and I reported anything
I thought might be of interest
to my clients.
- Your clients?
- The Foreign Office.
The Ministry of Defense.
So, you work for the British Government.
- No. Not really.
- No?
Governments change.
I work for the British people.
I gather intelligence
so that the government
can protect the British people.
I do not gather intelligence
so that the government can lie
to the British people.
With respect, Mrs. Gun,
you're a spy.
Yes.
You gather information
from people's phones and computers
and you feed that to your clients.
- Yes.
- You eavesdrop on private conversations.
- And now you're upset
at being asked to do that
to members of the Security Council?
Detective...
I don't object to being asked
to collect information
that could help prevent a terror attack.
What I object to is being asked
to gather intelligence
to help fix a vote at the UN
and deceive the world into going to war.
- Who put you up to this?
- No one.
But you gave the memo to someone.
Who did you give it to? A journalist?
Someone in the anti-war movement?
Your husband?
You don't have to answer that.
No, I will answer that.
My husband had absolutely
nothing to do with this.
He was briefly detained
here, too, wasn't he?
- Pending deportation?
- Yes, he was.
- And then you married him.
- Yes.
His paperwork has been resubmitted.
- He signs in here once a week.
- He's a Muslim.
I'm sorry?
He's a Kurdish Turk
seeking permanent residence in Britain.
And given what Saddam Hussein
has done to the Kurdish people,
murdering over 180,000 of them
with chemical weapons,
I can assure you
my husband has absolutely
no sympathy whatsoever
with the Iraqi regime.
Then why did you leak a memo
intended to help remove Saddam Hussein?
'Cause by attacking Iraq,
you don't simply attack Saddam Hussein,
you attack the country
of over 30 million people!
And I cannot bear to think
of the pain and the suffering
that that will cause.
Frankly, I don't see
how anyone can bear it.
Detective, is she going to be
formally charged?
That's a decision
for the Attorney General.
Lord Goldsmith will need time
to decide how to deal with you.
The custody sergeant will release you
on police bail today.
You'll be told to return to the station
in approximately three months,
by which time a decision
on whether to charge you
will have been made.
Are you all right, janum?
- Are you all right?
- Yeah, come on.
Katharine?
I'm sorry. I deal mostly
with petty criminals,
drunks and drug addicts.
If you're charged,
you're gonna need someone
with a lot more experience than me.
- I see.
- Have you heard of Liberty?
They handle human rights cases,
political cases, often for free.
Well... I just wanted
to be sure you knew that.
- Good luck.
- Thank you.
Thank you.
George W. Bush's patience with
the United Nation has run out
because they haven't managed
to get those nine votes
at the Security Council
which would give them,
what they call, a moral majority.
That represents a real failure
of American diplomacy.
This is the man who's advising Tony Blair
on the legality of war.
The Attorney General Lord Goldsmith
has, I understand, told the Prime Minister
military action would be legal
without a second resolution.
But it's all down to interpretation.
What is she saying?
They have not got the votes
but they're going to war, anyway?
...arguing old UN resolutions don't count
and war is illegal without a new one
or a new threat.
So the troops are in place.
Some UN inspectors are quitting Iraq.
Just how close are we to war?
Fergus has been assessing
the evidence. Fergus?
All the signs are now
that war is very, very close now...
Hi.
- Do you wanna come in?
- No, no, no.
I'm all packed for London.
I just...
I just wanted to say,
I think that what you did was amazing.
- You do?
- Yeah. A lot of us do.
Really?
Are they going to charge you?
I don't know.
God, Kat, I'm so sorry.
Hey, you didn't do anything wrong.
I didn't do anything right either.
I better be going. Bye.
My fellow citizens,
at this hour,
American and coalition forces
are in the early stages
of military operations
to disarm Iraq, to free its people
and to defend the world from grave danger.
Our nation enters
this conflict reluctantly,
yet our purpose is sure.
The people of the United States
and our friends and allies
will not live at the mercy
of an outlaw regime
that threatens the peace
with weapons of mass murder.
We will meet that threat now.
We should have got that memo out sooner.
- We did what we could.
- We fucking failed.
So that we do not have to meet it later
with armies of firefighters
and police and doctors
on the streets of our cities.
Now that conflict has come,
the only way to limit its duration
is to apply decisive force.
I'm so fucking naive.
This will not be a campaign
of half measures
and we will accept no outcome but victory.
I have to go.
You want to come to the cafe?
Work with me?
I'll call you later.
If we use the phones,
they'll be listening.
Let them listen.
We have nothing to hide.
You should contact those lawyers...
...today.
Please.
- Hello?
- Hi. It's Katharine.
Katharine Gun. I phoned this morning.
Yes, Katharine. Please, come on up.
- Katharine?
- Hello.
James. Lovely to meet you.
- Thanks for seeing me.
- Not at all.
I'm sorry about the decor.
We like to say
we focus more on our clients.
This is Shami Chakrabarti, our director.
- Hello, Katharine.
- And this is Ben Emmerson.
- Hi.
- Hello.
This was the only memo you took?
- Yes.
- No one suggested you take it?
- No.
- And you've never met Martin Bright?
- Martin called me last week.
He said he didn't know who you were,
but he wanted us to be aware
that you might need our help.
Well, that was very kind of him.
He said he got the memo
from someone he knew
but he wouldn't say who.
Do you want to tell us who you gave it to?
Look,
if you don't mind,
I would prefer not to say.
I promised I wouldn't.
Okay.
When you met Yasar, he had
already applied for asylum.
- Yes.
- Which was denied.
Yes, they said that there
wasn't a significant enough risk
of persecution if he went back.
And that's when you married him?
- Yes.
- And did he pay you?
Absolutely not.
I'm sorry, I don't mean to upset you.
It's just that your husband is Muslim
and the prosecution
will be looking for motive.
My motive was to stop a war
and save lives. I failed.
All I've managed to do is put
my husband's future at risk.
And your own.
In fact, by leaking information
to try and stop a war, I'd argue
that you chose loyalty to your country
over loyalty to your government,
your marriage and yourself.
You had nothing to gain
and everything to lose.
I think that speaks rather highly of you.
He's trying to give you a compliment.
I see.
Part of our job is to try and anticipate
what the prosecution's
going to throw at you.
Some of the people we meet
are looking for attention,
a way to elevate their humdrum lives.
- Well, I'm not.
- No, I don't think you are.
Sorry.
There's nothing to be sorry for.
We're here to help.
And we don't have duress.
She's adamant no outside agency
put any pressure on her.
Public interest?
The public has a right to know
when their government is lying.
We cite the Falklands case
when Thatcher lied about why she ordered
the sinking of that Argentinian ship.
- Belgrano.
- Yeah.
- Who was the whistleblower?
- Clive Ponting.
The jury acquitted him, didn't they?
Yes, and immediately afterwards,
Thatcher had
the Official Secrets Act amended
to avoid being caught in a lie
in the future.
So since '89, the public interest is
effectively whatever
the government says that it is.
We've got nothing.
I have to think about it.
Sorry, I have to go.
I promised Anne a weekend away.
If they charge her,
we might have to plead guilty
and ask for a reduced sentence.
But she's young and principled.
A judge might even think that
what she did was morally right.
Or crucify her as a traitor.
Bye.
- You sure he was following you?
- He was staring at me.
Sometimes men stare...
Yeah, it wasn't that kind of a stare.
What kind of a stare was it?
Yas, please, I'm scared. Okay?
I'm scared.
You know, for years,
I've tried to be legal here.
- I know.
- Then why'd you do it?
These arseholes got their war, anyway.
Saddam's over. And you know what?
- I'm glad he's over!
- War is not over.
Ousting Saddam is just the beginning.
- What do you know about war?
- I work at GCHQ.
All you do is listen to people talking!
You've never seen war!
You've never smelled it!
Never even come close to it!
Yas, I understand why you are angry.
It is my fault and I'm sorry.
I am so sorry.
But I watched Blair with his smug smile
and his sterile speeches
that tell us nothing
of what it must feel like
to be a child in Iraq right now.
I know I'm not sorry
that I tried to stop him.
I'm not.
I'm only sorry that I failed.
Thank you for inviting us in.
What is it you came to say?
Well, there's been a development.
- Am I going to be charged?
- That I don't know.
Then why are you here?
I gather you went to see a lawyer today.
- Did you follow me?
- No.
Because somebody did.
Well, you must know
that after what you did,
GCHQ is concerned.
I have a right to legal advice.
Unfortunately, it's not as simple as that.
When you signed on to work for GCHQ,
you agreed to be bound
by the Official Secrets Act
for the rest of your life.
I know what I signed, detective.
Then you know that it says here
in Section 1-1
that "a person is guilty of an offense
"if he or she
"discloses any information
"relating to security or intelligence."
This means that you cannot
discuss anything
with anyone outside of GCHQ
relating to the document you leaked.
Are you saying I can't talk to a lawyer?
You have the right to talk to a lawyer.
It's just that you cannot discuss
anything to do with your work at GCHQ,
or the contents of the memo you leaked,
or how it came into your possession
or who wrote it.
All of this information is top secret.
So disclosing it
to anyone outside of GCHQ,
even a lawyer,
would be a further violation
of the Official Secrets Act,
which could result in further prosecution
and a much longer prison sentence.
We just wanted you to be aware of that.
So if I may not talk to a lawyer,
who may I talk to?
You should talk to your superiors at GCHQ.
- Are you fucking joking?
- Yas, please. Please.
We should hear
what the detectives have to say.
They're just doing their job.
Simply put, if you wish
to tell anything to a lawyer
or the press or anyone else...
...you first need to clear it with GCHQ.
Detective...
I leaked only one memo.
I had good reason to do so
and I intend to make those reasons public
if I am charged.
I will not talk to my lawyers again
unless I am charged.
Tell that to GCHQ.
Are you grilling or smoking that fish?
I am smoking.
I've soaked the wood chips in water.
I've got charcoal.
I'm... I'm trying something new.
- Hi.
- Ken?
- Hi, Ken.
- Guess you're down here for the weekend.
- Yes. Just for the night.
Yeah, me too. It's been a while.
Would you... Do you want a drink?
No, thanks. Sally's cooking dinner.
- Hello, Anne.
- Hi.
- I'm so sorry to intrude.
- Not at all.
How's the new job?
Well, it's eye-opening.
In fact, I wondered
if I might ask Ben's opinion
about a new case that my office
has been asked to prosecute.
It won't take a minute. Would you mind?
How do you know that I met her?
Security services are all over this.
And it's not just
a domestic embarrassment.
The Americans are very unhappy.
Well, that is upsetting.
Come on, Ben, it's not funny.
What she did was
a deliberate act of betrayal.
Look, Ken, we're not colleagues anymore.
We're on different sides here.
I think she wants to be seen
as some sort of cause celebre.
But she swore allegiance
to the intelligence services
and when you do that
you don't get to pick and choose
what orders you'll follow.
Following orders
is not a defense to a war crime.
Yes, but who is she to undermine
the strategic objectives
of a democratically-elected
Prime Minister.
Come on, she's not selling
state secrets to Moscow.
She exposed an illegal attempt
to secure a UN resolution for war
which would have given Blair perfect cover
for the bloody mess that we're in now.
No, she should have kept her mouth shut
or complained to her superiors.
Now I've got a real problem with people
who think that from some lowly position
they can possibly see the big picture.
So then you would never question authority
even if you knew it was breaking the law.
Ben, you can't blame me
for being angry with her.
We're at war.
So, I'm going to assign
the best prosecutor in my office
to bring this girl down,
which shouldn't be difficult.
She's already confessed.
I appreciate your determination
to make an example of her,
but you shouldn't be here.
Come on, we're friends.
I'll make my position perfectly clear.
If you charge her, then I will defend her
to the best of my ability.
So let's go home and pretend
that this conversation never happened.
You're not working today?
No. I have to sign in at the station.
- Then we can go for a hike.
- I want to see the sea.
Leave it.
Hi, we're not in. Please leave a message.
Katharine, it's James Welch from Liberty.
We should talk.
Could give me a call
when you get the message?
Hello?
Katharine.
I'm afraid I have some bad news.
James, you know that
GCHQ said I couldn't talk to you.
Then, well, the good news is
we finally had the gag order lifted.
We've agreed to not ask any questions
about what other work you did at GCHQ.
But what happens
going forward isn't up to them.
Your case is now in the hands
of the Crown Prosecution Service.
They're going to charge you.
We should meet next week.
- Katharine?
- Yes.
Okay. Yeah.
I know that this is a lot to take in,
but we will help you.
Thank you.
- Okay.
- Thank you very much, James.
Speak soon.
"GCHQ whistleblower charged."
"Traitor or spy?"
"Spy speaks out."
"The spy who wouldn't keep a secret."
"Who is Katharine Gun?"
"Leak against this war."
She's everywhere.
What's your angle?
Look.
"Katharine Gun faces jail for exposing
"American corruption in the run-up to war.
"Now her celebrity supporters insist
"it is Bush and Blair
who should be in the dock."
Celebrity supporters?
Little tabloidy, don't you think?
Hey, we're building awareness.
How about Daniel Ellsberg?
He leaked the Pentagon Papers.
I know who Ellsberg is, Martin.
Of course you do. Forgive me.
Well, Ellsberg described it as...
"The most important
and courageous leak I've ever seen.
"No one else has ever done what she did.
"Tell secret truths at personal risks
"before an imminent war,
in time, possibly, to avert it."
Okay, that's classy.
I'll be quick.
Are you waiting for the tall man?
- The dark-haired one?
- Yeah.
He was shouting
that his wife was outside.
- They took him.
- What?
They took him.
Where is he?
Sorry. Who are you?
I'm Yasar Gun's wife. Where's my husband?
I'm sorry, ma'am.
He's scheduled for deportation.
What?
No. No, no. No, no.
Look, look, there's been
some sort of mistake.
I need to see my husband right now.
I'm afraid that's not possible.
You can't go in there!
Please. Please, please, please, please.
Let me see him, please.
Please, he doesn't have anything with him.
He doesn't even have any money.
I'm sorry. They've already taken him.
No, no.
They won't say where.
I don't know. Oh, God, James,
I don't know what to do.
Katharine, I'm so sorry. I'm at the Hague.
- Who's your MP?
- I don't know.
- Is it Nigel Jones?
- Nigel Jones, yes. Yeah.
Do you have your marriage certificate?
- Yeah, yeah, somewhere.
- Right.
Find it and I'll track Nigel down.
Of course they're
legally married, Beverly.
I'm holding their marriage certificate.
I'm sorry, but his application
to remain in this country has been denied.
Mistakenly.
He's complied with every directive
your department's issued.
Nigel, your constituent is accused
of betraying her country.
Do you really think we should
be helping her husband?
I think deporting her husband
when she's facing a trial
looks like state bullying.
All right, I'll review his paperwork.
Thank you.
And please make sure
he's not flown out tonight.
I'm sorry. Best I can do for now.
I promise I will pick this up
first thing tomorrow.
Hello?
We tracked him to
Harmondsworth Detention Center.
It's a deportation center
at Heathrow Airport
right off the M-25.
Go to the main gate and wait there.
Are they gonna release him?
We have ministerial approval
but no paperwork yet.
There is a possibility
he's already been put on a plane.
- What?
- Yeah, I'm checking.
Just get there as soon as you can.
Out you go. Let's go. Move it.
This is a mistake, sir.
- This is a mistake.
- Come on.
Please.
I need to call my wife.
I must call my wife!
Next in line.
Hello?
Yeah?
James, James,
I don't know
if I'm even at the right place.
Yeah, yeah, yeah, I know,
but it's 4:00 a.m.
There's nobody to talk to.
Wait, wait. Someone's coming. Wait.
Oh, my God. Oh, my God.
I'm so sorry. I'm so sorry. I'm so sorry.
- It's all right.
- You okay?
- I'm okay.
- Are you okay?
- You're okay?
- Yeah, yeah.
If they try and pull
anything like that again,
then I want to go public.
- Not a good idea.
- Why not?
Because people are fickle.
Many will hate you.
Your personal lives will be picked apart,
your marriage will be interrogated.
In fact, we think it will be best
if Yasar was kept well out of this.
You should probably not attend the trial.
- I understand.
- What? No.
Janum, we both know the jury will prefer
an English girl
without an immigrant husband.
You know what? That is ridiculous.
We are married and we have
nothing to be ashamed of.
The shame is on them, not you.
You don't need to risk
your freedom to prove it.
We should discuss how you'll plead.
Not guilty.
But you understand you confessed.
I confessed that I leaked a memo
in order to try and save lives.
And we will use that argument
to ask for a reduced sentence.
If you do plead guilty,
there will be no jury.
You could be out of jail
in less than six months.
Given how badly the war is going,
we think a judge is likely
to be sympathetic.
But I'd have a criminal record.
That is true.
Which I would carry with me
for the rest of my life
into every job interview,
every application for credit.
- Yes.
- And I'm sorry.
We would be conceding
that no one in Intelligence
can ever tell the British people
when their government is lying.
Not when the lies are protected
by the Official Secrets Act, no.
I'm sorry. This is all a charade.
I mean, if you're saying
that I have to plead guilty
because the act allows
absolutely no defense whatsoever,
then the very idea
of a fair trial is a joke.
I'm sorry, Katharine,
but the best we can do
is ask a judge for leniency.
Post Belgrano, there really is no defense
to a breach of the Official Secrets Act...
Except perhaps one.
Katharine said it herself.
She leaked the memo to try to save lives.
But she still broke the law.
Yes, but there are circumstances
where you can break the law.
It's only in situations
of absolute necessity...
- Necessity. Exactly.
- Ben, you're reaching.
Am I? What are the requirements
for a defense of necessity?
Imminent threat to your life
or the lives of others.
Yeah, and no other reasonable
way to prevent loss of life.
Yes, right, well, the invasion posed
an imminent threat to thousands of lives.
Katharine has no right
to try and prevent a war
authorized by the Attorney General.
- Unless the war is illegal.
- What?
Wait, wait, so now we're going
to put the war on trial?
Yes.
I believe that Katharine Gun
tried to stop an illegal war.
What she did was necessary
to try to save thousands
of British-American and Iraqi lives.
And Goldsmith specifically stated
that the invasion was legal.
He said so only three days
before the invasion.
What was his position before that?
What was his advice at the time
Katharine leaked the memo?
- Well, we have no idea.
- Well, I'd like to find out.
Because Blair spent a lot of energy
trying to secure a new UN resolution.
I suppose.
When Lord Goldsmith finally said
the war was legal,
his deputy legal advisor resigned.
Yes, Elizabeth Wilmshurst.
Yeah, that's right.
- She resigned. Yes, yes.
- But she didn't say why.
She couldn't.
If she did, she'd be charged
under the Official Secrets Act.
So I need to get a meeting
with Elizabeth Wilmshurst.
- She's not gonna go public.
- She doesn't have to.
All we need is a hint
that Goldsmith changed his mind
about the legality of the war.
I'm sorry, Ben.
There are two ways they could justify war.
- We've only addressed one.
- So what am I missing?
- Self-defense.
- Come on.
Does anyone honestly believe
that this country
was about to be attacked by Iraq?
I do agree, but that's why
they trotted out Powell.
To make the case for WMDs.
If it's true that Iraq
has weapons of mass destruction
that pose an imminent threat
to this country,
the war is legal without a UN resolution.
How many people actually believe
Iraq still has weapons
of mass destruction?
Well, they're still looking.
If we go down this route,
we better pray none are found.
I'm gonna get
Elizabeth Wilmshurst's number.
You've put me
in a rather awkward position.
I'm sorry, but thank you for seeing me.
I think what she did took great courage.
And she was naive, of course, but brave.
And you were brave enough to resign.
But not to speak out in public.
If I had, I might have caused
more of a brouhaha.
Sparked a proper debate.
Can I ask you how did you resign?
I wrote a letter.
And in that letter, did you give a reason
for your resignation?
I restated my position
on the legality of going to war.
Which was?
That it would not be lawful to use force
without a new Security Council resolution.
Did Goldsmith initially
support your view?
He did.
He told Blair that
if military action were taken,
he expected the government to be accused
of acting unlawfully.
And was that a written opinion?
It was a detailed advisory document.
Right, so then would that
have been his position
at the time that Katharine Gun
printed the Koza memo
on February 3?
Yes.
And then he went to Washington.
Really?
- Well, who did he meet there?
- I wasn't given details.
But after that trip, his opinion changed.
In nine short paragraphs, he said that
the UN's authorization
for the 1991 Gulf War
could be reactivated
to legitimize a new war with Iraq.
He told the Prime Minister
what he wanted to hear?
At best, he was persuaded to support
a really fringe point of view.
- Really fringe.
- Yeah.
- Martin Bright.
- Martin.
- Ben.
I took your whistleblower's case.
Yes, I heard. Can I meet her?
No, not yet, Martin.
I don't want a media frenzy.
Okay. When she's ready.
Before some hack tracks her down.
Come on, Ben, I broke her story.
I'm on her side.
Well, you can help by finding out
why the Attorney General
went to Washington
just before the war started.
Wait, Goldsmith went to DC?
I'd like to know who he met there.
Right. I'm on it.
- And how is Peter?
- Peter is in Iraq.
Yeah, yeah, I know.
I've been reading his articles.
Listen, if he hears anything, even a hint
that Saddam really did have
weapons of mass destruction,
then please call me.
Of course. Can I ask why?
Well, let's just say
that if WMD are found,
then defending Katharine will be
a little more complicated.
- I'll get back to you.
- All right, thank you.
Okay. Thank you. Bye.
There's thousands of inspectors here
from the US Army, the British Army
the CIA, FBI.
And still nothing?
No, no, not a fucking thing. Nothing.
Anyway, some Polish troops found
a cache of Sarin gas warheads
dating back to the Iran-Iraq
War, but they were all empty.
And right now, I'm standing
in a glass factory
and all they've found is piles
of silica sand and soda ash.
So, yeah.
Things must be getting ugly in Washington.
Well, you should talk to Ed.
Maybe we could end up doing
a joint piece or something.
- Peter, what was that?
- No, no, no.
It's just our guys detonating
some conventional ordnance.
- They don't wanna have...
- Jesus.
...kids finding unexploded shit
in the rubble.
All right, talk soon. Take care.
Yeah, all right, mate. Bye.
- February 11.
- What?
Goldsmith's in DC
meeting with the attorneys
for Bush, Powell, Rumsfeld and Rice.
- Okay, hold on...
- But that's not the big story.
The really big story is the OSP.
The Office of Special Plans.
Turns out when Bush wasn't getting
the intelligence he wanted,
Rumsfeld bypassed the CIA
and set up his own intelligence unit.
They fed raw unvetted intelligence
to Bush and Powell who lied us into a war!
Yeah. Okay, Ed. I appreciate that.
But let's, first, try and help
a young woman stay out of prison.
You said Goldsmith met Bush's lawyers
on February 11. Who were those lawyers?
"John Ashcroft, Alberto Gonzales
William Taft, Jim Haynes, John Bellinger."
The attorneys for Bush,
Powell, Rumsfeld and Rice.
Wow. They really turned up the heat.
You know, I almost feel sorry
for Goldsmith.
Don't. He fucking caved when
his country needed him most.
- That's a great headline, mate.
- It bloody is.
- All right.
- Print it.
- Yeah. Bye.
- We'll share the byline.
Bye.
Nutter.
Goldsmith was under tremendous pressure
before he went to Washington.
Our military were refusing to invade
without a clear legal opinion from him
that what they were doing was legal
in case of a war crimes trial.
Thank you, Martin, very helpful.
Well, no, hang on, hang on, hang on.
Do you think you have a defense?
- We're working on it.
- Okay.
- Let me know when you do.
- Well, you'll hear it in court.
- Come on, Ben.
- Bye.
- He's persistent.
- He is.
But it's your story
and you don't need a media trial.
We should request full disclosure
of all legal advice
given by Goldsmith in the year
leading up to the invasion.
He'll almost certainly refuse to comply.
Then we'll subpoena Wilmshurst.
Hell, we'll subpoena Goldsmith
himself. And Blair too.
Ben, if we can't prove that
Goldsmith changed his advice,
we can't argue that Katharine
tried to stop an illegal war.
What then?
- Then I'll be found guilty.
- Almost certainly, yes.
So, do you want to risk it all
and ask for disclosure
of the government's documents,
or would you rather plead guilty
and hope for a reduced sentence?
I think...
...we were lied into an illegal war.
Let's ask for the documents.
All right.
You ready?
No statements now, remember.
Let's just get through those doors.
- Katharine, you okay?
- Yeah.
Ben's already in the courtroom
but he wanted you to meet Martin Bright.
He's covering the trial.
Katharine, it's an honor.
I'll be in the press gallery.
I hope that's all right?
Yeah, yeah. You...
You took a real risk.
No, you took the risk.
I think what you did was extraordinary.
I think what you exposed
was extraordinary.
All our institutions failed us.
The government, the intelligence services,
the press, they failed us categorically.
Even my own paper supported
the war before that memo.
Well, thank you for being here.
No, thank you.
It's important what you did. It matters.
- We should go in, Martin.
- Yes.
Sorry, James. Yes. Be strong.
Katharine, you're going that way.
Can I just have a moment?
- Of course.
- Thanks.
You should leave that behind, ma'am.
Yeah, sorry,
can I just have a second? Just...
Janum?
Hi. I'm about to go in.
I love you.
I love you too.
I'm gonna try and call as soon as I can.
I wish I was there with you.
I know.
I'm so sorry.
You have nothing to be sorry for.
I'm so proud of you. So proud of you.
Bye.
Miss?
Sorry.
I can take your bag.
- We'll see you in there, okay?
- Yeah.
Your scarf and jacket, please.
Okay, and then if you'll raise your arms.
Okay.
She's here.
Right. Okay.
Judge is ready.
Up you go.
Are you Katharine Teresa Gun?
Yes.
I'm sorry. Can you speak up, please?
Yes, I am.
"Katharine Teresa Gun,
"you are charged with an offense
"contrary to Section 1, Subsection 1
"of the Official Secrets Act of 1989.
"In that between January 30
and March 2 of 2003
"you did knowingly and intentionally
"disclose top secret
intelligence information
"contrary to the said act."
How do you plead? Guilty or not guilty?
Ms. Gun?
Not guilty.
Yes, Mr. Ellison.
Yes, thank you, My Lord.
My Lord, in light of recent developments,
the prosecution will offer no evidence
against the defendant on this indictment.
I beg your pardon?
My Lord, the prosecution
will not pursue the indictment.
Today?
- No, My Lord.
- I'm sorry.
Are you asking
for an adjournment, Mr. Ellison?
No, My Lord.
You are saying that you do not wish
to proceed at all?
- Yes, My Lord.
- But the accused confessed.
Yes, My Lord.
And yet you do not wish to proceed?
- No, My Lord.
- I'm sorry.
I find that extraordinary.
Do you care to explain?
My Lord, the accused submitted
an unusual defense.
Yes. The defense of necessity.
- Yes.
- And?
And we do not believe we have
sufficient evidence to rebut it.
Why not? She confessed.
Because, My Lord,
the documents that
we have called for would show
that this country was taken
to war illegally...
...and may expose
the government to charges of war crimes.
- That is absurd!
- Is it?
Then kindly hand over the documents
that we have asked to see.
My Lord, the prosecution is not obliged.
Indeed, it is not permitted to continue
with a case if it does not believe
there is a realistic prospect
of a conviction.
To do so would be a waste
of taxpayers' funds.
My Lord, I am thankful
that the charges against
Ms. Gun are being withdrawn
and that the Crown
is suddenly so determined
not to waste taxpayers' money.
But surely, after months of uncertainty
and severe distress,
Ms. Gun is entitled to know
why the government is dropping this case?
Indeed, the public is entitled to know.
- Hear, hear.
- Hear.
Mr. Ellison?
Again, My Lord, we do not feel
we have a realistic prospect
of a conviction.
There is nothing more I can say.
To be clear,
you are withdrawing all charges
against Katharine Teresa Gun?
Yes, My Lord.
Ms. Gun...
...you are free to go.
In a startling about-turn,
the Crown Prosecution Service
has dropped its case
against an intelligence...
At 29, Katharine Gun was
facing jail for breaking the...
The last thing the government wanted
within months of a general election
was a big court case
focusing on the legality of that war...
And he was involved in deciding
whether today's case...
First tonight, Katharine Gun walks free.
In a dramatic about-turn, the Crown...
So did the Attorney General
put pressure on to stop the trial?
Did GCHQ?
Did the prime minister? No answers.
Tonight we're simply asked to believe
that there was no case to answer.
Would you do it again?
- Would you do it again?
- I have no regrets.
Yes, and I would do it again, yes.
Caught anything?
Not yet.
You know, it wasn't my choice
to prosecute.
I was bound by the decision
of the Attorney General.
Why did you keep her
in a state of distress
for a year before you brought charges?
The services wanted to make
an example of her.
If we dropped the case any earlier,
what kind of message would that have sent?
Do me a favor, Ken.
Go and fish somewhere else.
iSubDB.com - fast, modern, simple
Subtitles search by drag & drop